Email-Interview mit Reinis Aboltins


1. Is the role of Gazprom & Itera and of Russian capital in general in the 
Latvian energy market considered a problem? Is this situation viewed similarly 
by everyone or are there differing opinions?

Yes, the dominance of Gazprom and Itera is considered to be a problem in Latvia, 
but it is not a problem to be solved quickly. Solving this problem requires 
caution and consideration. There are different opinions on this. Most parties 
that form the ruling coalition are in favor of reducing the Gazprom and Itera 
influence in natural gas marked. The largest party in the parliament – Harmony 
Center, however, is not in favor of dismantling the monopoly. The presence of 
Russian capital in Latvia is also largely viewed with suspicion, but there is 
too little information whether it is just business or business with political 
strings attached.



2. What importance does gas market regulation and in particular ownership 
unbundling have in Latvian energy policy? Is the status of Latvijas Gāze as a 
monopoly supplier and a vertically integrated utility seen as a problem in 
Latvian politics?

Yes, Latvijas Gāze monopoly in Latvia is seen as a problem by most Latvian 
political parties and general public. Ownership unbundling is a worthy political 
goal to be achieved because that is going to introduce competition and lower 
natural gas prices. But, again, this is not a problem to be solved quickly 
because there are political and legal issues involved.



3. Are there major differences about gas market regulation among Latvian 
parties, industry associations, and perhaps other civil society groups (trade 
unions, ecological movements)? 

Most Latvian political parties, with few exceptions, are in favor of natural gas 
market liberalization, and so are civil society groups. I have no information 
regarding industry associations.



4. Would you say that one can see certain guidelines or priorities in Latvian 
energy policy over the last few years? More specifically, are there any drivers 
of policy making one can detect? For example, the 'Energiewende' in Germany, the 
attempt to turn away from nuclear energy and towards renewable, has been the 
general theme in German energy policy. Is there anything similar in Latvia? 

The most important trend in Latvian energy policy has been interconnections with 
neighbor countries and gradual reduction of energy dependence on Russia.



5. In the official "Latvian Energy Long Term Strategy - 2030" the view is 
expressed that energy policy primarily has to serve economic growth and improve 
the competitiveness of Latvia's industry. The issue of energy security and in 
particular diminishing the dependence on Russian energy imports are considered 
less important. Would you confirm that supply security takes a less prominent 
role in Latvian energy policy than do purely economic considerations? 

I would say that there is little interest in approaching the issue of energy 
security in confrontational terms. It has become increasingly clear that 
monopolies will charge a higher price therefore talks about energy serving the 
need of industries and economic growth has an in-built component of gradually 
shedding energy dependence on Russia and liberalizing natural gas market. 


6. What is your opinion on the nature of the policy making process? To what 
degree are decisions made on technical grounds or on considerations of daily 
politics? Do these decisions reflect a long-term vision or could they be 
regarded as being the result of politicking and presumably lobbying by interest 
groups? Could you give some indicators, why you would describe Latvian energy 
policy one way or the other? 

Decisions are mainly taken with a view of slowly moving towards less dependence 
on Russian energy supplies. The policy process is slow, and mostly energy issues 
are seen as trying to balance our relations with Russia and facilitating greater 
energy independence. The process is slowly moving in the right direction towards 
building interconnections with Sweden and unbundling of Latvijas Gāze monopoly. 
 

 
7. What do you think are the reasons that Latvia has delayed the implementation 
of the EU Third Energy Package for so long? Using at first an exemption in the 
directive as an 'energy island' for not opening its market for competition and 
then only deciding on March 13rd 2014 to demand full ownership unbundling of 
Latvijas Gāze (while Lithuania for example has done so in 2010). 

Latvia has enjoyed a certain level of security of supply to Inčukalns 
underground gas storage facility. Also, Latvia has been able to get a slightly 
better price than Lithuania. There are also political and legal issues involved 
therefore unbundling has not yet taken place. Also, infrastructure, that would 
allow Latvia to receive benefits of competition, has not been put in place, for 
example, LNG facilities have been absent. Thus, Latvia has decided to pursue a 
more gradual path towards liberalization.