Email-Interview mit Reinis Aboltins


1. Is the role of Gazprom & Itera and of Russian capital in general in the 
Latvian energy market considered a problem? Is this situation viewed similarly 
by everyone or are there differing opinions?



I would say these are two different issues. Gazprom and Itera Latvija got their 
shares of Latvijas Gāze as the result of a privatisation agreement between the 
Latvian state and the new shareholders in 1997 and have been shareholders with 
changing proportions since. Although Gazprom represents Russian capital quite 
clearly and Itera represents Russian capital indirectly the presence of this 
capital is very obvious and clear unlike the alleged influence of other capital 
of Russian origin. Also, Itera Latvija is a local company unlike Gazprom. 
However it is presumed that it is through Itera Latvija  that the so called soft 
power activities are carried out; Itera Latvija sponsors ice-hockey and other 
sports and culture activities.  Other Russian capital in Latvian economy is 
something slightly different than Gazprom and Itera. A number of Latvian 
commercial banks have a fairly high share of deposits by non-residents. A few 
logistics and transport companies also have close relation with Russian capital. 



2. What importance does gas market regulation and in particular ownership 
unbundling have in Latvian energy policy? Is the status of Latvijas Gāze as a 
monopoly supplier and a vertically integrated utility seen as a problem in 
Latvian politics?


The problem is that the decision-makers have demonstrated inability to think 
independently, to find and analyse information and draw conclusions. Giving in 
to the interests of Latvijas Gāze and Gazprom and Itera Latvija thereof is yet 
another example of vested interests that Russian capital and authorities 
affiliates with Latvia. Natural gas has an important role in the energy 
portfolio; roughly 1/3 of electricity is produced in large CHPs (namely Riga 
CHP-1 and CHP-2) from natural gas. The share of natural gas in CHP generation 
(district heating + electricity) is over 93% while the share in boiler houses 
reaches 62%. Latvijas gāze has been very successful in defending its interests 
in the government throughout the last 20 years and it is still very influential. 
Postponing the liberalisation of gas market just recently is yet another example 
of its influence on politics. Too few politicians understand the regulatory 
framework and therefore are making decisions that, from the strategic point of 
view, go contrary to the interests of the state. 


3. Are there major differences about gas market regulation among Latvian 
parties, industry associations, and perhaps other civil society groups (trade 
unions, ecological movements)? Large industrial producers like state owned 
energy incumbent Latvenergo in general largely opposes renewable energy and 
supports gas technologies. As to commenting the regulation, Latvijas Gāze has 
been very vocal on its own. Industry associations have been more general in 
their comments limiting their rhetoric to energy prices and not so much 
advocating gas in particular. One particular detail – district heating tariffs 
have constantly been lower in those municipalities, where biomass is used in 
heat production and tariffs have been higher, where natural gas has been used as 
the key energy resource. Thus, municipalities (especially the smaller ones and 
outside of the capital city Riga) tend to criticise gas while Riga says burning 
gas is more efficient. Still, it is more about prices than the gas market 
regulation. 

4. Would you say that one can see certain guidelines or priorities in Latvian 
energy policy over the last few years? More specifically, are there any drivers 
of policy making one can detect? For example, the 'Energiewende' in Germany, the 
attempt to turn away from nuclear energy and towards renewable, has been the 
general theme in German energy policy. Is there anything similar in Latvia? 
Latvian government adopted a long-term Energy strategy 2030 in May 2013 and this 
has been the official framework for policy planning. However, a number of 
decisions since the adoption of this strategy show that ad hoc decision-making 
is still the routine model. The government and the parliament postponed 
liberalisation of electricity market for households and liberalisation of gas 
market as well, thus hampering the implementation of the EU 3rd energy package. 
These decisions go contrary to the strategy and have purely political motivation 
– Latvia is having general election in October 2014, which puts pressure on 
politicians who are making populist decisions. Instead of elaborating and 
adopting an improved renewable energy support scheme the government and the 
Parliament adopted a new law on Subsidised Electricity Tax. 

5. In the official "Latvian Energy Long Term Strategy - 2030" the view is 
expressed that energy policy primarily has to serve economic growth and improve 
the competitiveness of Latvia's industry. The issue of energy security and in 
particular diminishing the dependence on Russian energy imports are considered 
less important. Would you confirm that supply security takes a less prominent 
role in Latvian energy policy than do purely economic considerations? I would 
actually say that unfortunately Latvia does not have energy policy in the 
meaning that there is a systematic, cohesive and sustainable policy in place and 
all decisions are derived from one common vision on the development of the 
energy sector. Strategy 2030 puts emphasis on low energy prices and the 
competitiveness of economy, but omits such important goals as supply risk 
minimisation and supply diversification both in the meaning of sources and 
routes of supply [of primary energy] and diversification of local supply – use 
of renewable resources for heat and power production (including in distributed 
energy production). IEA and the EU have clearly indicated that use of local 
energy resources and RES in particular adds significantly to the security of 
supply. 


6. What is your opinion on the nature of the policy making process? To what 
degree are decisions made on technical grounds or on considerations of daily 
politics? Do these decisions reflect a long-term vision or could they be 
regarded as being the result of politicking and presumably lobbying by interest 
groups? Could you give some indicators, why you would describe Latvian energy 
policy one way or the other? There is plenty of evidence that decisions related 
to natural gas market have been made without due analysis and without inviting 
neutral expertise. Technical aspects have indeed been used to argue in favour of 
one or another decision, but this has only served as a pretext for political 
decisions that have even not had hard legal backing. All Latvian governments 
over the last at least 10 years have been under strong influence of natural gas 
interests associated with Gazprom and Itera Latvija and presumably functioning 
as the cornerstone of the so-called soft-power ambitions of the only gas 
supplier. The decisions can be regarded as resulting from lobbying, but they 
have had long-term effects and the most recent vote by the Parliament only adds 
to this incompetent and biased decision-making. 

7. What do you think are the reasons that Latvia has delayed the implementation 
of the EU Third Energy Package for so long? Using at first an exemption in the 
directive as an 'energy island' for not opening its market for competition and 
then only deciding on March 13rd 2014 to demand full ownership unbundling of 
Latvijas Gāze (while Lithuania for example has done so in 2010). The decision by 
the Parliament on March 13 actually closed the gas market until April 2017. 
Unbundling was effectively postponed by this unanimous vote (91 “yes” (out of 
100 votes in total) in favour of the amendments in the Energy Law postponing gas 
market liberalisation). The reason for such decisions is a very strong natural 
gas lobby that has effectively hampered any attempts to become less dependent 
on Russian gas. The decision, which now allows Latvijas Gāze to limit access to 
the transmission and distribution until full unbundling in presumably April 
2017 makes Latvia and energy island, which it was not and would not be once 
Klaipeda LNG terminal is put in place at the end of 2014 and starts operations. 
The problem now is that LT will not be able to access LV gas transmission 
system since it has a legal backing to such potential behaviour by Latvijas 
Gāze. Latvijas Gāze new already in 2005 that the gas market liberalisation is 
set for April 4, 2014, but did everything to maintain its monopoly and control 
over all licensed commercial activity – transmission, distribution, storage and 
trade.